# ABM-for-sustainability
The ABM-for-sustainability repository contains the Netlogo code of the agent-based model developed to foster environmentally sustainable behaviors among individuals (ABM-basic.nlogo), a folder containing the Netlogo code of the model tuned with Siena's data (ABM-Siena) and the data-set containing Siena's data (DataSet.xlsx).
The main purpose is to reduce the environmental impact of human activity and reverse the trend of rising temperatures and the increase in extreme weather events caused by climate change.
## Description
The model contained in the file ABM-basic.nlogo simulates the behavior of single individuals, living in a perfectly regular city, regarding sustainable practices.
Thus, the agents in the model are citizens who make decisions on certain issues that have an environmental impact and can range from waste sorting to energy and water consumption. The decision-making process included in the model is described by game theory. More precisely, the agents in the model are players who can choose at each iteration between two pure strategies, cooperate and defect, where cooperation represents the ensemble of sustainable actions that a citizen can undertake from an environmental point of view and vice versa for defection. Agents are classified in five types which corresponds to five different kind of games: activists (players having cooperation as fixed strategy), deniers (players having defection as fixed strategy), indifferents imitators of the majority (Stag-Hunt game players), indifferents opponents of the majority (Hawk and Dove game players) and indifferents imitators of the best neighbor (Prisoner's dilemma game players).
The agents in the model interact with each other and these interactions are represented by a graph on which the model is placed. More in detail, in our ABM we have a finite number of agents and each of them is a node in a graph, whose links represent agents' interactions. Therefore, agent's decision at each iteration depends on the type of game he participates in and on the interactions with others. The overall goal of the model is to analyze the dynamics of the evolution of cooperative behavior and to understand under what conditions the emergence of cooperation occurs, with the aim of fostering sustainable behaviors among citizens.
The same model was then applied to the case of the city of Siena, and the related code can be found in the ABM-Siena.nlogo file inside the ABM-Siena folder. The input data were obtained by distributing a survey among citizens living in the historic center of the city and from which we obtained for each of the respondents age, gender, educational level, location (address of residence), awareness level about climate change and the type of game they participate in, where the possible kinds of game are the five listed above. These data are contained in the nine csv files, contained in the ABM-Siena folder, age_list.csv, gender_list.csv, education_list.csv, third_list.csv, coordiantes.csv, latitude_list.csv, longitude_list.csv, awareness_list.csv and agent_type.csv.
The knowledge of the location of each agent allows their georeferencing on the urban map of the historic center of Siena, which is imported into the Netlogo code using the roads.shp.xz, roads.dbf.xz, roads.prj, and roads.shx files obtained from [mapcruzin](https://mapcruzin.com/). These files contain the entire Italian road network, which is restricted to the historic center of Siena within the Netlogo code.
## Getting started
### Dependencies
To run both codes in the repository, you must install Netlogo (version 6.3.0) on your computer.
### Installing
Netlogo can be freely downloaded from the [Netlogo website](https://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/).
After installing Netlogo on your computer, to run the code not adapted to Siena's data you only need to download the ABM-basic.nlogo file. To run the code tuned with Siena's data, you need to download the entire ABM-Siena folder. The roads.shp.xz and roads.dbf.xz files must be decompressed before running the code.
### Executing program
To run both codes, you must first press on the "setup" button in the Netlogo interface. This button allows you to set the model to an initial state and prepare it for execution.
After that, to start running the program, you need to press the "go" button. To stop execution, simply press the "go" button again.
The initial conditions can be modified by the user directly from the interface by changing the values of the sliders and choosers present: total-number-of-agents, n-of-activists, n-of-deniers, n-of-indifferents-SH, n-of-indifferents-HD, n-of-indifferents-PD, initial-cooperation, defection-award, SW-rewiring-prob, nodes-size and torus.
To run the model with the new initial conditions, it is necessary to press the "setup" button again and then the "go" one.
## Authors
Vittoria Socci, Eleonora Vitanza and Chiara Mocenni
## License
This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the LICENSE.md file for details
## Acknowledgments
The project takes inspiration from an existing Netlogo model: [NetLogo PD Basic Evolutionary model](http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/models/PDBasicEvolutionary).
